# Comparative analysis of data inputs to predictive policing models

The repository contains the report, poster, and visualization for my group's final project for our CSE 6242 class at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Information on how to install/execute the code and visualization can be found in OVERVIEW.txt.

**Visualization:** https://predictive-policing-analysis.herokuapp.com/

**Data:** https://drive.google.com/file/d/1p7mmtUge6416uQGxYRItv3aisv5CptN5/view?usp=sharing

### Report Introduction & Problem Statement

> **Introduction:** By identifying where crimes are likely to occur and restructuring patrol routes to increase police presence in these areas, place-based predictive policing technologies offer the promise of deterring rather than responding to crimes. They also promise more “objective” direction of police activity – pushing police to where crime occurs rather than being guided racist notions of which neighborhoods harbor criminals [1]. Proponents of these technologies often overlook the extent to which crime data are themselves an artefact of racist historical patterns of policing [2]. 

> **Problem Statement:** We aim to develop granular maps of crime predictions and neighborhood demographics to evaluate the extent to which place-based crime prediction has disparate racial impacts. We approximate predictive policing techniques by using time-series forecasting and crimes and calls for service data from Baltimore, MD, and the year 2018, to predict where crime is most likely to occur – crime “hot spots”. To investigate the influence of data inputs on which neighborhoods (and racial groups) are identified as hot spots, we compare predictions based on calls for service and crime data. 
> Understanding the difference between calls for service and crime is key to appreciating the value of the proposed approach. A call for service is generated when a Baltimore resident calls 911 or police internally request the assistance of additional officers for public safety issues, representing a broad range of potential police activity. Not every call for service results in a crime being reported or an arrest, nor does every crime reported correspond to a call for service. The production processes for each type of data are therefore distinct. We investigate whether these distinct data types generate different predictions of where crime will occur, as well as the implications for what racial groups are policed more heavily

> To understand how these different types of data might over- or under-represent different parts of the city, we look at the number of arrests, crimes, calls for service, and Type 1 calls for service (a subset of calls for service that relate to Type 1 or felony crimes, the same crimes that are included in the ‘Crime’ dataset) by census tract. We then calculate the extent of over-/under-representation of each data input for all census tracts, relative to the population of each tract. One clear finding is that predominantly non-African American census tracts are underrepresented, regardless of the data input. The other, more subtle finding is that the most over-/under-represented tracts in each data set have different African American population shares. This suggests that crime predictions trained on historical data might predict crime in locations that differ systematically in terms of neighborhood demographics. We evaluate this possibility in the Experiments and Evaluation section below.
